add a KBI on removing an annex (#31)
psychoinformatics-de/knowledge-base: kbi/0008/index.rst

.. index::
   triple: git-annex; uninit; remove dataset annex

KBI0008: Remove a dataset's annex
=================================

:authors: Christian Mönch <christian.moench@web.de>
:discussion: https://github.com/datalad-handbook/book/issues/939

> :keywords: annex, remove annex, annex uninit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:keywords: annex, remove annex, annex uninit
:software-versions: datalad-0.18.3
```

Making concrete proposal for https://github.com/psychoinformatics-de/knowledge-base/pull/31#issuecomment-1517484884 Importantly, this tag should no be datalad-specific, because the knowledge base is not datalad-specific.

The topic of software version recording has come up before in other KBIs.

This knowledge base item describes how to remove the annex from a DataLad
dataset and propagate that change to siblings

> DataLad version used: this knowledge base item was created based on DataLad version 0.18.3
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Replaced by metadata

> The scenario
> ------------
> 
> You have a DataLad dataset that has annexed files and you decide that you
> don't want to use git-annex anymore in this dataset. This change should
> also be propagated to all siblings of the dataset.
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

More or less redundant with the first sentence in the KBI.

A few words of caution
......................

> 1. You should not remove the annex if you have large files, i.e. 1GB or larger, in your dataset. ``git`` is not intended for large files, which is the reason for the creation of ``git annex`` in the first place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You should not remove an annex of a dataset, if you have large files (>100MB), or many files (>several MB) that are cumulatively large. ``git`` is not intended for large files, which is the reason for the creation of ``git annex`` in the first place.
```

I am using the github file size limit as another arbitrary threshold. The original phrasing sound like 900MB is still OK -- but would actually already yield a fairly crippled repo.

> 2. If you remove the annex, your files will be untracked in your dataset directory. That means, they are not versioned at this moment. If you don't follow the instructions in this knowledge base item precisely you might lose those files. Please be careful when you remove the annex! Work on a copy, or make sure that you have a sibling that contains your data. We do not want you to lose data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Once you removed an annex, previously annexed files will then be untracked in the dataset's directory. That means, they are no longer versioned at that moment. If you do not follow these instructions precisely **you might lose the files' content**. It is safer to work on a dataset copy, or make sure that another dataset sibling still contains all files' content.
```

Style change suggestion. Focus less on intentions and personal connection, and more on facts.

Removing the annex
------------------

> Go to the dataset from which you want to remove the annex and save the current state. Fetch all annexed data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the dataset from which you want to remove the annex and save the current state.
```

Seems redundant with next segment.

.. code-block:: console

    > cd my_dataset
    > datalad save

> Fetch all annexed data. Data that is not locally present when you remove the annex will not be locally present after removal of the annex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetch all annexed data. File contents that are not locally present when the annex is removed can no longer be retrieved via ``datalad get``.
```

Author: Irritatingly, the link destination will show up as file content. So there is content, but it is not the content of the file. That is an additional problem to not being able to ``datalad get`` content.

.. code-block:: console

   > datalad get .

Now it is time to remove the annex. The command ``git annex uninit`` (`uninit documentation <https://git-annex.branchable.com/git-annex-uninit/>`_) will perform this task. 
But it will leave the now un-annexed files as "untracked" in the dataset:

.. code-block:: console

    > git annex uninit
    unannex <your-file(s)> ok
    (recording state in git...)
    Deleted branch git-annex (was <SHA>).
    > git status
    Changes to be committed:
        (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
            deleted:    <your-file>

     Untracked files:
        (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
            <your-file>

If you want to keep their content, you **have** to make sure to add them to ``git`` before doing anything else. 

> This can be done with a single ``git add .`` command in the root of the dataset if your dataset does not contain aditional untracked files that should not become part of the dataset content (if your dataset is not clean, you can add all files that you want to keep individually with the command ``git add <file-name>``). 

Reviewer: There should be no need for a dedicated `git add` call. `datalad save` should perform this automatically. Did you find that is not working? If so, that would indicate the presence of a bug.

Author: You are right, it works indeed. There was a situation, where I found it not working, but that might have been some screw up on my side. Will check again and then remove the ``git add``-command and the related instructions.

    > git annex uninit
    > git add .
    > datalad save

That is it, no more annexed files in your local dataset copy.
If you want to push this dataset to siblings, read on.

Pushing an un-annexed dataset to a sibling
------------------------------------------

If your dataset has sibling datasets that were created and pushed to before running ``git annex uninit``, these siblings will still have an annex.
If you were to ``datalad push`` to or ``datalad update`` from these siblings, it would re-instate the git-annex branch in your dataset.
While this would not annex the previously annexed files again, it could cause future files to get annexed.
To prevent this, you have to delete the ``git-annex``-branch in the sibling before pushing or pulling updates.
Afterwards you can push the un-initialized dataset to the sibling. All subsequent clones from the sibling will have no annexed data. The following two commands will delete the ``git-annex``-branch from the sibling and push the un-initialized dataset to the sibling (we assume that the siblings name is ``a_sibling``):

.. code-block:: console

    > git push a_sibling ":git-annex"
    > datalad push -f gitpush --to a_sibling

> That is it. Your sibling will have no more annex either.

Reviewer: What about existing clones? Is there annex (the set of directories underneath `.git/annex` actually removed? If not, we should say that, because it might just continue to sit there forever.

Author: Good point. Other existing clones will still carry ``.git/annex`` after an update. Also, their ``git-annex`` branch will still exist. If I am not mistaken, they should execute the following commands in the dataset root:

``` 
> git branch -D git-annex
> rm -rf .git/annex
```

I will add that.

To prevent this, you have to delete the ``git-annex``-branch in the sibling before pushing or pulling updates.
Afterwards you can push the un-initialized dataset to the sibling. All subsequent clones from the sibling will
have no annexed data. The following two commands will delete the ``git-annex``-branch from the sibling and push
the un-initialized dataset to the sibling (we assume that the siblings name is ``a_sibling``):

.. code-block:: console

    > git push a_sibling ":git-annex"
    > datalad push -f gitpush --to a_sibling

That is it. Your sibling will have no more annex either.

Removing the annex from other clones of the dataset
---------------------------------------------------

Any previously existing clone of the newly un-annexed dataset will still contain annex-related data, even after a
``datalad update`` from an un-annexed sibling. As a result some data will be stored twice in the
dataset, once in the worktree and once in the directory ``.git/annex/objects``. In addition
the sibling will still contain a branch called ``git-annex``. To remove both of these artefacts, execute
the following commands from the root of your dataset:

.. code-block:: console

>     > rm -rf .git/annex

Reviewer: I think this will not work in general, because a standard annex will have annex keys deletion-protected. It should likely be sufficient to preface this with a `datalad drop`. I guess to work reliably a `--force availability` could be needed  (the removal of the annex at `origin` could have already killed the last "other copy"). However, I am speculating and this would need to be tried.

Author: > I think this will not work in general, because a standard annex will have annex keys deletion-protected. It should likely be sufficient to preface this with a `datalad drop`. [,,,]

`datalad drop` will not do anything because there is no more annex. But `git annex uninit` will change the flags of the deepest level directories in `.git/annex`, so that all files can be deleted. I added that. Thanks for catching this :-)

.. index::
   single: <annex>; <remove a git annex>

> KBI0008 Remove a git annex
> ==========================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
KBI0008: Remove a dataset's annex
=============================
```

To match the style of other KBIs (the colon), and to disambiguate the location (annex) from the software (git annex)

:authors: Christian Mönch <christian.moench@web.de>
:discussion: https://github.com/datalad-handbook/book/issues/939
:keywords: annex, remove annex, annex uninit

> This knowledge base item describes how to remove a git annex from a DataLad
> dataset and propagate that change to siblings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This knowledge base item describes how to remove a the annex from a DataLad
dataset and propagate that change to siblings
```

to disambiguate the location (annex) from the software (git annex)

The scenario
------------

You have a DataLad dataset that has annexed files and you decide that you
don't want to use git-annex anymore in this dataset. This change should
also be propagated to all siblings of the dataset.

A few words of caution
......................

1. You should not remove the annex if you have large files, i.e. 1GB or larger, in your dataset. ``git`` is not intended for large files, which is the reason for the creation of ``git annex`` in the first place.

2. If you remove the annex, your files will be untracked in your dataset directory. That means, they are not versioned at this moment. If you don't follow the instructions in this knowledge base item precisely you might lose those files. Please be careful when you remove the annex! Work on a copy, or make sure that you have a sibling that contains your data. We do not want you to lose data.

> Removing a git annex
> --------------------
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Removing the annex
------------------

```

more disambiguation

> Go to the dataset from which you want to remove the git annex and save the current s

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go to the dataset from which you want to remove the annex and save the current state:
```

.. code-block:: console

    > cd my_dataset
    > datalad save

> Now it is time to remove the annex. The command ``git annex uninit`` will perform this task. But it will leave the now un-annexed files as "untracked" in the dataset. If you want to keep their content, you **have** to make sure to add them to ``git`` before doing anything else. This can be done with a single ``git add .``-command in the root of the dataset, if your dataset is clean, i.e. does not contain other untracked files, that should not become part of the dataset content (if your dataset is not clean, you can add all files that want to keep individually with the command ``git add <file-name>``). Afterwards you should execute a ``datalad save``. So the next commands are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now it is time to remove the annex. The command ``git annex uninit`` (`uninit documentation <https://git-annex.branchable.com/git-annex-uninit/>`_) will perform this task. 
But it will leave the now un-annexed files as "untracked" in the dataset::

.. code-block:: console

    > git annex uninit
    unannex <your-file(s)> ok
    (recording state in git...)
    Deleted branch git-annex (was <SHA>).
    > git status
    Changes to be committed:
        (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
            deleted:    <your-file>

     Untracked files:
        (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
            <your-file>

If you want to keep their content, you **have** to make sure to add them to ``git`` before doing anything else. 
This can be done with a single ``git add .`` command in the root of the dataset if your dataset does not contain aditional untracked files that should not become part of the dataset content (if your dataset is not clean, you can add all files that want to keep individually with the command ``git add <file-name>``). 
Afterwards you should execute a ``datalad save``. 
So the full sequence of commands are:
```

This change:
- splits a super long line into one line per sentence (will make it easier to view future changes in git-diff)
- adds a link to the git-annex uninit docs
- adds an example git-status after a git-annex uninit to showcase what it looks like

.. code-block:: console

    > git annex uninit
    > git add .
    > datalad save

> That is it, no more annex files in your local dataset copy. If you want to push this dataset to siblings, read on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is it, no more annexed files in your local dataset copy.
If you want to push this dataset to siblings, read on.
```

Pushing an un-annexed dataset to a sibling
------------------------------------------

> Before you can push a freshly un-annexed dataset to a sibling that still has an annex, you have to delete the ``git-annex``-branch in the sibling. Afterwards you can push the un-annexed dataset to the sibling. All subsequent clones from the sibling will have no annexed data. The following two commands will delete the ``git-annex``-branch from the sibling and push the un-annexed dataset to the sibling (we assume that the siblings name is ``a_sibling``):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your dataset has sibling datasets that were created and pushed to before running ``git annex uninit``, these siblings will still have an annex.
If you were to ``datalad push`` to or ``datalad update`` from these siblings, it would re-instate the git-annex branch in your dataset.
While this would not annex the previously annexed files again, it could cause future files to get annexed.
To prevent this, you have to delete the ``git-annex``-branch in the sibling before pushing or pulling updates.
Afterwards you can push the un-initialized dataset to the sibling. All subsequent clones from the sibling will have no annexed data. The following two commands will delete the ``git-annex``-branch from the sibling and push the un-initialized dataset to the sibling (we assume that the siblings name is ``a_sibling``):
```

.. index::
   single: <annex>; <remove a git annex>

> 

Author: True. What do you suggest?

> 

Reviewer 2: I pushed a change

> 

Reviewer 2: It now renders as: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29738718/233587895-905d6a34-b362-4945-bda4-51f19c4a0608.png)
